This video was made possible by Brilliant.
Start learning with Brilliant for 20% off
by being one of the first 200 people to sign
up at Brilliant.org/Wendover.
This is East Asia—comprised of China, Japan,
Korea, and Taiwan—and this is Europe.
2.4 billion people live in these two areas—a
third of the world’s population.
More impressively, each of these two regions
have a GDP of about $20 trillion.
Combined, just these countries account for
half of the world’s economic activity.
They are two of the world’s most dense,
most developed, and m ost economically interlinked
regions and are home to the world’s largest
and most influential cities yet laying between
them is just one country—Russia.
This more of less means that one country controls
whether Europe can get to Asia and vice versa
and for a while, they couldn’t.
During the cold war, almost universally, non-soviet
airlines were not allowed to fly over the
Soviet Union.
This proved a huge barrier to travel.
In the 1950’s, flying on BOAC, which later
became British Airways, the fastest route
from London to Tokyo involved leaving London
at 10am on Friday and stopping in Rome, Beirut,
Bahrain, Karachi, Calcutta, Yangon, Bangkok,
and Manila before finally arriving in Tokyo
at 6am on a Sunday.
All in all, that was 36 hours and 10,000 miles
of travel to get between two cities 6,000
miles apart and that was also their fastest
service on the Comet jet plane.
Their slower and cheaper propeller plane service
would leave London on a Sunday and not arrive
in Tokyo until Thursday after 88 hours of
travel.
It was just hugely inefficient but there was
a better way—over the Arctic.
SAS was the first to develop routes overflying
the Arctic but other airlines soon followed.
These routes were first used to get to the
American west coast faster.
This involved developing new navigation systems
to overcome the issue of traditional magnetic
compasses not working properly in the high
north.
In the 1950’s no commercial airplane had
the range to fly to the American west coast
non-stop but with SAS’s new polar route
they would take a relatively quick route from
Copenhagen stopping in Kangerlussuaq, Greenland
and Winnipeg, Canada before arriving in Los
Angeles.
This cut what was previously a 36 hour trip
down to 22.
With SAS having proven that commercial flights
over the Arctic were both safe and commercially
viable, other airlines quickly followed not
only setting up routes to the American west
coast but also to the far east.
The most direct route from London to Tokyo
flies over Siberia, but since that airspace
was closed airlines chose another way—the
other way around the world.
In 1960, only 40,000 people lived in Anchorage,
Alaska and Alaska had just became a state
the year before, but its airport emerged as
a crucial stopping point between Europe and
Asia.
BOAC’s thrice weekly polar route from London
to Tokyo would leave Heathrow at 1:45 pm,
arrive in Anchorage nine and a half hours
later, stop for an hour to refuel, and then
fly the remaining seven hours to Tokyo.
All in all, it was timetabled to take only
seventeen and a half hours—half of what
the trip took before.
It was as drastic a reduction in travel time
as when Concorde cut New York to London flights
from six hours to three.
BOAC wasn’t the only one.
All the major European carriers set up routes
to the far east via Anchorage in the 1960s
and 1970s.
While Anchorage sees only a few dozen daily
commercial flights mostly to the continental
US today, in the 1970s it was served by Air
France, SAS, KLM, Iberia, Lufthansa, Japan
Airlines, Korean Air, and more.
This tiny town in Alaska quickly became one
of the most connected and cosmopolitan areas
of the world with passengers and flight crews
from all around the world stopping over all
because of where it was.
As aircraft became more advanced with longer
range, there were a few airlines that managed
to avoid stopping in Anchorage on their way
from Europe to East Asia.
Finnair, for example, starting flying from
Helsinki to Tokyo non-stop in 1983 by flying
in international airspace north of Russia
over the North Pole.
This made what is today a nine hour flight
thirteen hours but it was still faster than
stopping in Anchorage.
Overwhelmingly, though, airlines continued
to fly through Anchorage.
Eventually, though, the Soviet Union did of
course fall in 1991 and with that Russia started
to grant overflight rights to European and
East Asian airlines.
They first had to modernize and anglicize
their air traffic control system.
All international pilots and air traffic controllers
worldwide speak English but before, since
there were few international flights over
Russia, the Russian air traffic controllers
didn’t speak english.
Once the changes were made, airlines quickly
switched to flying non-stop from Europe to
Asia over Siberia.
That left Anchorage largely deserted.
The airport built a large and modern international
terminal in 1982 to handle all the traffic
passing through the airport but then, less
than ten years later, all those airlines that
kept the airport busy left in droves.
Today, that international terminal, built
to handle hundreds of flights per month, only
sees a flight every few days.
Russia, meanwhile, is prospering thanks to
the opening up of its airspace.
Flying to Asia over Siberia saves airlines
huge amounts of time and money so Russia therefore
charges airlines huge amounts of money to
do so.
Exact numbers vary by airline and are kept
secret, but for each roundtrip flight between
Europe and Asia, Siberian overflight fees
are believed to account for up to $100 of
a single passenger’s ticket price.
Russia has an enormous amount of power by
controlling this airspace and they use it
to their advantage.
133 countries have signed the International
Civil Aviation Organization’s Transit Agreement
which essentially allows any airline from
any country to fly through the signatory’s
airspace but Russia, however, has not, so
they can pick and choose which country’s
airlines get to fly through their airspace.
The country can and has used its airspace
as a geopolitical weapon—in 2014 they threatened
to shut down their airspace to European Union
airlines in response to sanctions, in 2017
they threatened to close the airspace to Dutch
airlines in response to a reduction in landing
slots for a Russian airline at Schiphol airport,
and in April 2018 they tacitly threatened
to close their airspace to US airlines in
response to US military action in Syria.
But Russia not only decides which countries
can fly in its airspace, it also decides which
specific airlines.
There is more or less a rule that only one
airline per European country can overfly Russia.
There are certainly exceptions—both British
Airways and Virgin Atlantic are London based,
for example, but both overfly Siberia on their
routes to Shanghai and Hong Kong, but Air
France is the only French airline with Siberian
overflight rights, Lufthansa is the only German
airline with overflight rights, Iberia is
the only Spanish airline with overflight rights,
and so on and so forth.
For the longest while, this wasn’t a problem.
European countries aren’t that big and few
had more than one intercontinental airline
but nowadays, however, that’s changing.
We’re seeing more and more budget airlines
competing with the large, established carriers
on long-haul routes but, with this system
of overflight permissions, the legacy carriers
more or less have a monopoly on east Asian
routes.
SAS, for example, operates out of Norway,
Denmark, and Sweden and they have Siberian
overflight rights that take them to destinations
like Tokyo, Beijing, and Shanghai.
SAS is therefore the only Scandinavian airline
allowed to overfly Siberia.
But also in Scandinavia is Norwegian Air.
As one of the largest low-cost airlines in
the world, Norwegian has pioneered long-haul
budget flying mainly focusing on flights from
major European cities to the US.
The airline has said, though, that it wants
to expand eastwards.
They already have flights from Copenhagen,
Oslo, and Stockholm to Bangkok and from London
to Singapore, but these destinations are far
enough south that they don’t involve flying
over Siberia.
The airline has repeatedly applied for Siberian
overflight rights and repeatedly been denied.
They argue that SAS does not operate any flight
from Norway to Asia so they should be granted
permission as the only Norwegian airline but,
since SAS is partially registered in Norway,
Russia isn’t granting permission.
Norwegian does have a subsidiary legally registered
in the UK but its unlikely that Russia would
grant overflight rights to this since British
Airways and Virgin Atlantic also have overflight
rights.
Norwegian airlines also has a subsidiary based
in Ireland which does not have an airline
with Siberian overflight rights but, SAS also
has a subsidiary based in the country which
could mean that Russia will deny rights to
this subsidiary too.
As of now, Russia has not granted overflight
permission to any budget airline.
Others have tried—Icelandic airlines Wow
Air and Icelandair have attempted to negotiate
overflight rights—but Russia views overflights
as a way to make money and wants to charge
fees that would make it impossible for a low-cost
airline.
For now, Wow Air has planned to start flights
from Reykjavik to Delhi, India which, in a
direct routing would fly over Russia but can
route around Russia by only adding 45 minutes
in extra flight time if an arrangement isn’t
made before flights start in December 2018.
Russia is a powerful politically-savvy country
that knows that these overflight rights are
a huge negotiation tool.
Pulling the rights of a country’s airline
would be a huge financial blow and granting
rights is also a huge advantage.
Competition, though, is good for the consumer
and this current system stifles it.
Until Russia starts granting overflight rights
to budget airlines, nonstop flights to Asia
will stay expensive.
The fact that this shortcut over Siberia is
now open at all, however, saves millions of
passengers yearly enormous amounts of time
and money.
Watching this ten-minute video of our technological
progress might make you think that we got
here in one giant leap, but that, of course,
is not the case.
We had to develop new navigation systems to
work around old-school compasses, build airports
to help planes refuel, and extend the range
of aircraft.
The problem of advancing enough to be able
to fly non-stop to the other side of the world
was huge but it was broken down and approached
in small steps.
Brilliant works in a similar way—breaking
a problem down, identifying the relevant concepts,
thinking clearly through each part, and building
it back up to the conclusion.
In this manner, super complex topics like
number theory or calculus can be easily understood
by anyone.
My favorite from Brilliant is their logic
course, which starts simple, but then builds
up your skills so you can solve seemingly
impossible problems.
To support Wendover Productions and learn
more about Brilliant, go to brilliant.org/wendover
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription.
Thanks for watching and we’ll see you again
in three weeks for another Wendover Productions
video.